# ALX Simple Shell Team Project

> A simple shell is a program that allows users to enter commands and executes them by interfacing with the operating system. It provides a command-line interface for users to interact with the system by typing in commands followed by any necessary arguments, and then pressing enter.

A simple shell usually involves the following basic steps:

1. Displaying a prompt: When the program starts, it displays a prompt to indicate that it is ready to accept input.

2. Reading input: Once the prompt is displayed, the program waits for the user to enter a command. The input is usually read in as a string.


3. Parsing input: After the user has entered a command, the shell parses the input to separate the command and its arguments. It usually does this by breaking up the input into individual words or tokens.

4. Executing the command: Once the input has been parsed, the shell executes the command. This involves creating a new process to run the command and passing any necessary arguments to it.

5. Displaying output: After the command has been executed, the shell displays any output generated by the program.

6. Repeating the process: The shell then returns to the beginning and displays a new prompt, ready to accept more input.

The basic functionality of a simple shell can be extended by adding additional features, such as handling piping, I/O redirection, and background processing.


> This is an ALX collaboration project on Shell. We were tasked to create a simple shell that mimics the Bash shell. Our shell shall be called **hsh**

## Project was completed using

- C language
- Shell
- Betty linter

## General Requirement for project

- All files will be compiled on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS using gcc, using the options -Wall -Werror -Wextra -pedantic -std=gnu89
- All files should end with a new line
- A README.md file, at the root of the folder of the project is mandatory
- Use the Betty style. It will be checked using betty-style.pl and betty-doc.pl
- Shell should not have any memory leaks
- No more than 5 functions per file
- All header files should be include guarded
- Write a README with the description of the project


## Description ##

**hsh** is a simple UNIX command language interpreter that reads commands from either a file or standard input and executes them.

### How **hsh** works
* Prints a prompt and waits for a command from the user
* Creates a child process in which the command is checked
* Checks for built-ins, aliases in the PATH, and local executable programs
* The child process is replaced by the command, which accepts arguments
* When the command is done, the program returns to the parent process and prints the prompt
* The program is ready to receive a new command
* To exit: press Ctrl-D or enter "exit" (with or without a status)
* Works also in non interactive mode

### Compilation

`gcc -Wall -Werror -Wextra -pedantic -std=gnu89 *.c -o hsh`

### Invocation

Usage: **hsh** [filename]

To invoke **hsh**, compile all `.c` files in the repository and run the resulting executable.

**hsh** can be invoked both interactively and non-interactively. If **hsh** is invoked with standard input not connected to a terminal, it reads and executes received commands in order.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo 'hello'" | ./hsh
'hello'
$
```

If **hsh** is invoked with standard input connected to a terminal (determined by [isatty](https://linux.die.net/man/3/isatty)(3)), an *interactive* shell is opened. When executing interactively, **hsh** displays the prompt `$ ` when it is ready to read a command.

Example:
```
$./hsh
$
```

Alternatively, if command line arguments are supplied upon invocation, **hsh** treats the first argument as a file from which to read commands. The supplied file should contain one command per line. **hsh** runs each of the commands contained in the file in order before exiting.

Example:
```
$ cat test
echo 'hello'
$ ./hsh test
'hello'
$
```

### Environment

Upon invocation, **hsh** receives and copies the environment of the parent process in which it was executed. This environment is an array of *name-value* strings describing variables in the format *NAME=VALUE*. A few key environmental variables are:

#### HOME
The home directory of the current user and the default directory argument for the **cd** builtin command.

```
$ echo "echo $HOME" | ./hsh
/home/projects
```

#### PWD
The current working directory as set by the **cd** command.

```
$ echo "echo $PWD" | ./hsh
/home/projects/alx/simple_shell
```

#### OLDPWD
The previous working directory as set by the **cd** command.

```
$ echo "echo $OLDPWD" | ./hsh
/home/projects/alx/printf
```

#### PATH
A colon-separated list of directories in which the shell looks for commands. A null directory name in the path (represented by any of two adjacent colons, an initial colon, or a trailing colon) indicates the current directory.

```
$ echo "echo $PATH" | ./hsh
/home/projects/.cargo/bin:/home/projects/.local/bin:/home/projects/.rbenv/plugins/ruby-build/bin:/home/projects/.rbenv/shims:/home/projects/.rbenv/bin:/home/projects/.nvm/versions/node/v10.15.3/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin:/home/projects/.cargo/bin:/home/projects/workflow:/home/projects/.local/bin
```

### Command Execution

After receiving a command, **hsh** tokenizes it into words using `" "` as a delimiter. The first word is considered the command and all remaining words are considered arguments to that command. **hsh** then proceeds with the following actions:
1. If the first character of the command is neither a slash (`\`) nor dot (`.`), the shell searches for it in the list of shell builtins. If there exists a builtin by that name, the builtin is invoked.
2. If the first character of the command is none of a slash (`\`), dot (`.`), nor builtin, **hsh** searches each element of the **PATH** environmental variable for a directory containing an executable file by that name.
3. If the first character of the command is a slash (`\`) or dot (`.`) or either of the above searches was successful, the shell executes the named program with any remaining given arguments in a separate execution environment.

### Exit Status

**hsh** returns the exit status of the last command executed, with zero indicating success and non-zero indicating failure.

If a command is not found, the return status is `127`; if a command is found but is not executable, the return status is 126.

All builtins return zero on success and one or two on incorrect usage (indicated by a corresponding error message).

### Signals 

While running in interactive mode, **hsh** ignores the keyboard input `Ctrl+c`. Alternatively, an input of end-of-file (`Ctrl+d`) will exit the program.

User hits `Ctrl+d` in the third line.
```
$ ./hsh
$ ^C
$ ^C
$
```

### Variable Replacement

**hsh** interprets the `$` character for variable replacement.


#### $ENV_VARIABLE
`ENV_VARIABLE` is substituted with its value.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo $PWD" | ./hsh
/home/projects/alx/simple_shell
```

#### $?
`?` is substitued with the return value of the last program executed.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo $?" | ./hsh
0
```

#### $$
The second `$` is substitued with the current process ID.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo $$" | ./hsh
6494
```

### Comments 

**hsh** ignores all words and characters preceeded by a `#` character on a line.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo 'hello' #this will be ignored!" | ./hsh
'hello'
```

### Operators

**hsh** specially interprets the following operator characters:

#### ; - Command separator
Commands separated by a `;` are executed sequentially.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo 'hello' ; echo 'world'" | ./hsh
'hello'
'world'
```

#### && - AND logical operator
`command1 && command2`: `command2` is executed if, and only if, `command1` returns an exit status of zero.

Example:
```
$ echo "error! && echo 'hello'" | ./hsh
./hsh: 1: error!: not found
$ echo "echo 'all good' && echo 'hello'" | ./hsh
'all good'
'hello'
```

#### || - OR logical operator
`command1 || command2`: `command2` is executed if, and only if, `command1` returns a non-zero exit status.

Example:
```
$ echo "error! || echo 'but still runs'" | ./hsh
./hsh: 1: error!: not found
'but still runs'
```

The operators `&&` and `||` have equal precedence, followed by `;`.

### hsh Builtin Commands

#### cd
  * Usage: `cd [DIRECTORY]`
  * Changes the current directory of the process to `DIRECTORY`.
  * If no argument is given, the command is interpreted as `cd $HOME`.
  * If the argument `-` is given, the command is interpreted as `cd $OLDPWD` and the pathname of the new working directory is printed to standad output.
  * If the argument, `--` is given, the command is interpreted as `cd $OLDPWD` but the pathname of the new working directory is not printed.
  * The environment variables `PWD` and `OLDPWD` are updated after a change of directory.

Example:
```
$ ./hsh
$ pwd
/home/projects/alx/simple_shell
$ cd ../
$ pwd
/home/projects/alx
$ cd -
$ pwd
/home/projects/alx/simple_shell
```

#### alias
  * Usage: `alias [NAME[='VALUE'] ...]`
  * Handles aliases.
  * `alias`: Prints a list of all aliases, one per line, in the form `NAME='VALUE'`.
  * `alias NAME [NAME2 ...]`: Prints the aliases `NAME`, `NAME2`, etc. one per line, in the form `NAME='VALUE'`.
  * `alias NAME='VALUE' [...]`: Defines an alias for each `NAME` whose `VALUE` is given. If `name` is already an alias, its value is replaced with `VALUE`.

Example:
```
$ ./hsh
$ alias show=ls
$ show

alias_management.c  execute.c       helper_p.c          shell.h
AUTHORS             expansions.c    helper_str.c        str_token.c
builtins_env.c      find_in_path.c  macros.h            tokenize.c
builtins_list.c     _getline.c      main.c
builtins_more.c     helper_1.c      man_1_simple_shell
env_management.c    helper_num.c    README.md
```

#### exit
  * Usage: `exit [STATUS]`
  * Exits the shell.
  * The `STATUS` argument is the integer used to exit the shell.
  * If no argument is given, the command is interpreted as `exit 0`.

Example:
```
$ ./hsh
$ exit
```

#### env
  * Usage: `env`
  * Prints the current environment.

Example:
```
$ ./hsh
$ env
NVM_DIR=/home/projects/.nvm
...
```

#### setenv
  * Usage: `setenv [VARIABLE] [VALUE]`
  * Initializes a new environment variable, or modifies an existing one.
  * Upon failure, prints a message to `stderr`.

Example:
```
$ ./hsh
$ setenv NAME Poppy
$ echo $NAME
Poppy
```

#### unsetenv
  * Usage: `unsetenv [VARIABLE]`
  * Removes an environmental variable.
  * Upon failure, prints a message to `stderr`.

Example:
```
$ ./hsh
$ setenv NAME Poppy
$ unsetenv NAME
$ echo $NAME

$
```


### What we learned:
* How a shell works and finds commands
* Creating, forking and working with processes
* Executing a program from another program
* Handling dynamic memory allocation in a large program
* Pair programming and team work
* Building a test suite to check our own code


## Authors © ##

👤 **ELIJAH BAYERE OLAIYA**

- GitHub: [@olittobee](https://github.com/olittobee)
- Twitter: [@olittobee4u](https://twitter.com/olittobee4u)
- LinkedIn: [@Elijah](https://www.linkedin.com/in/elijah-bayere-olaiya-2b0727144)


👤 **OMOWALE OKETOYINBO**

- GitHub: [@Realomooke2](https://github.com/Realomooke2)
- LinkedIn: [@Realomooke](https://www.linkedin.com/in/omowale-2058b8163)
- Twitter: [@Realomooke](https://twitter.com/realOmoOke?s=09)

